not understand your inquiry properly. The librarian may think you’re talking about
intelligence from the psychology perspective,1 requiring a few iterations back and
forth before you understand one another and get to the pieces of information you
need.
Then, after all this, you might discover the library doesn’t have the book you need;
or the information may be spread among several books, and you have to read them
all. Exhausting!
Unless you’re a librarian yourself, this is what often happens nowadays when you
search for something on the internet. Although we can think of the internet as a single
huge library, there are many different librarians out there to help you find the
information you need: search engines. Some search engines are experts in certain
topics; others know only a subset of a library, or only a single book.
Now imagine that someone, let’s call him Robbie, who already knows about both
the library and its visitors, can help you communicate with the librarian in order to
better find what you’re looking for. That will help you get your answers more quickly.
Robbie can help the librarian understand a visitor’s inquiry by providing additional
context, for example. Robbie knows what the visitor usually reads about, so he skips all
the books about psychology. Also, having read a lot of the books in the library, Robbie
has better insight into what’s important in the field of artificial intelligence. It would
be extremely helpful to have advisors like Robbie to help search engines work better
and faster, and help users get more useful information.
This book is about using techniques from a machine learning field called deep
learning (DL) to build models and algorithms that can influence the behavior of
search engines, to make them more effective. Deep learning algorithms will play the
role of Robbie, helping the search engine to provide a better search experience and
to deliver more precise answers to end users.
One important thing to note is that DL isn’t the same as artificial intelligence (AI).
As you can see in figure 1.1, AI is a huge research field; machine learning is only part
of it, and DL, in turn, is a sub-area of machine learning. Basically, DL studies how to
make machines “learn” using the deep neural network computing model.
The goal of this book is to enable you to use deep learning in the context of search
engines, to improve the search experience and results. Even if you’re not going to
build the next Google search, you should be able to learn enough to use DL techniques
within small or medium-sized search engines to provide a better experience to
users. Neural search should help you automate work that you’d otherwise have to perform
manually. For example, you’ll learn how to automate extraction of synonyms
from search engine data, avoiding manual editing of synonym files (chapter 2). This
saves time while improving search effectiveness, regardless of the specific use case o
domain. The same is true for having good related-content suggestions (chapter 6). In
many cases, users are satisfied with a combination of plain search together with the
ability to navigate related content. We’ll also cover some more-specific use cases, such
as searching content in multiple languages (chapter 7) and searching for images
(chapter 8).
The only requirement for the techniques we’ll discuss is that they have enough
data to feed into neural networks. But it’s difficult to define the boundaries of
“enough data” in a generic way. Let’s instead summarize the minimum number of
documents (text, images, and so on) that are generally needed for each of the problems
addressed in the book: see table